International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) 
 
E-ISSN: 2582-2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com       ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com 
 
IJFMR23011524 Volume 5, Issue 1, January-February 2023 1 
 
India's Brave Son Maharana Pratap 
Sudhir Kumar Kasana1, Khemchand Bairwa2, Dr. Vishnu Kumar Jatav3, 
Mukesh Kumar Saini4 
1,2,4Assistant Professor, Shri Krishna Mahavidyalaya, Sikandra , Dausa 
3Principal, Shri Krishna Mahavidyalaya, Sikandra , Dausa 
 
ABSTRACT 
In the research paper presented, an attempt has been made to dee ply highlight the sacrifice, 
conscientiousness and unity of Maharana Pratap, the leader of the people of Mewar in Rajast han; For 
example, Maharana Pratap was that hero of the history of India, about whom not only Rajasthan but 
every child of the world knows. He is the only king of Rajasthan, who did not inherit the state but was 
given by the public, this is the establishmen t of democracy in the monarchy, this is an example of how 
popular a king must have been among the public, how popular the former king was. Disobeys the order 
of Jagmal and makes Pratap king And Maharana Pratap was born in the 210th generation "This is the 
story of the one who used to say that slavery is not good for anyone, neither for strangers nor for loved 
ones" Maharana Pratap's painter was Naseeruddin, it can be said that Maharana Pratap was not only 
involved in wars Rather, his contribution was also a n important contribution to art and culture, this 
proves that Pratap was a secular ruler, in this way it can be said that the person was not dependent on 
history, the work done by him proves that he will be remembered for ages. will be done Researchers and  
students of the history subject can benefit from the information given in this research paper and can 
implement their ideals in their lives. 
KEYWORDS:  Conscientiousness, Establishment, Democracy, Culture, Generation, Secular Ruler 
INTRODUCTION OF MAHARANA PRATAP 
It is about that time, when Maharana Uday Singh of Mewar was there. On May 9, 1540, Maharana 
Pratap was born from the womb of Uday Singh's head queen Jaivanta Bai. He was the eldest of his 
brothers, that's why Pratap was the most beloved of the p alace, not only in the palaces but in the whole 
of Mewar, people used to call him by the name of Kika. Maharana Udai Singh died on Holi in 1572 AD, 
at that time the custom was that the one who would become the next king did not participate in the 
funeral of Maharana because the throne could not be kept vacant. So Jagmal did not participate in the 
funeral of Maharana. Uday Singh goes to take Jagmal as Maharana instead of Pratap due to the influence 
of Dhirbai, a Bhatiyani queen on Maharana, so Pratap goes to  participate in Rana's funeral. At that time, 
Akshay Raj Songara asked what Maharana Pratap was doing here, then he looked at Chunda and said 
that since the time of Chunda's descendants, this custom has been going on that who would be the heir to 
the throne of Mewar. Krishnadas Chundawat said that Rana ji will not decide the next king of Mewar, 
we will decide the next king of Mewar, thus Pratap was declared Maharana by the people and feudal 
lords of Mewar in Gogunda. When Pratap's coronation was taking plac e on February 28, 1572, all the
International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) 
 
E-ISSN: 2582-2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com       ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com 
 
IJFMR23011524 Volume 5, Issue 1, January-February 2023 2 
 
clocks were indicating at that time what would be the condition and direction of Mewar in the coming 
times. 
 
 
Figure-01 
 
OBJECTIVES  
 
1. To study of  the importance of  Maharana Pratap 
2. To study of the bravo of Maharana Pratap 
3. To study of the pratap's true friendship with Chetak 
 
PRATAP AS YUVRAJ 
From a young age, Prince Pratap is a true patriot, a great warrior like his forefathers, and treats his land 
as his mother. He follows the principles and teachings of his mother Jaywant a Bai. Pratap's stepmother 
Rani Dheerbai planned against Pratap by using her influence on Udai Singh to make her son Jagmal the 
legal heir. Pratap was popular among the masses from the very beginning because of his actions. He 
used to think that he loved his motherland very much, used to talk about patriotism with his friends since 
childhood. 
Pratap falls in love with his childhood friend Ajabde Panwar and they later get married. Ajabde gives 
birth to Pratap's eldest son and heir, Amar Singh. Pratap was sha ken by the death of Ajabde during the 
Battle of Haldighati. Pratap also marries Phoolbai due to political issues. 
The show traces the journey of Maharana Pratap as a loyal son, caring brother, faithful lover, loving 
husband and father, great king, great wa rrior and a true patriot. It also traces Akbar and his struggle 
against the Mughals.
International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) 
 
E-ISSN: 2582-2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com       ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com 
 
IJFMR23011524 Volume 5, Issue 1, January-February 2023 3 
 
CORONATION OF KING 
 
Figure 2 
Maharana Pratap was the most majestic and powerful ruler of Mewar. The first state consecration of 
Maharana Pratap was done on 28 February 1572 at the place of Gogunda. Maharana Pratap's formal 
state consecration took place in 1572. After the death of Maharana Udai Singh, Kunwar Jagmal was 
made the ruler of Mewar by the conspiracy of Udai Singh's wife Dheer Bai. But due to lack of any 
qualities of a king in him, Maharana Pratap was considered as the ruler of Mewar by his subjects and 
courtiers. His coronation was done in Gogunda by Krishnadas Chundavat of Salumbar. 
AKBAR'S EFFORTS TO SUBJUGATE PRATAP  
When his objectives could not be fulfilled  in the court set up by Akbar, he personally sent four 
delegations to Pratap, because taking an important princely state like Mewar under subordination meant 
bringing almost the whole of Rajputana under subordination. Therefore respectively 4 people who were 
important courtiers of Akbar. First of these, Jalal Khan was sent to Korchi in August, 1572, but Pratap 
gave a feast on this occasion, but he himself did not go to this feast and sent his son Amarsingh, due to 
which Mansingh got angry and went back, aft er this Akbar sent his Mansabdar and Mansingh's father 
Bhagwant Das was sent in October, 1573 but he also failed to persuade Pratap to submit to Akbar, 
finally Akbar sent his most eloquent minister Todermal in December, 1573. But Todermal also returned 
unsuccessfully. Now there was only one way left of the war. When Akbar could not accept his 
submission to Pratap, the battle of Haldighati took place on June 18, 1576. 
THE WAR OF HALDIGHATI  
Maharana Pratap displayed his valor in songs against Akbar Battle of  Haldighati On 18 June 1576, the 
world famous Battle of Haldighati was fought between Mughal emperor Akbar Mewar's brave 
Shiromani Maharana Pratap, in this war Akbar's army was led by Mansingh while The leadership of 
Pratap's army was famous, most of the h istorians believed Akbar's victory in this war but the reality was
International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) 
 
E-ISSN: 2582-2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com       ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com 
 
IJFMR23011524 Volume 5, Issue 1, January-February 2023 4 
 
something else, in this war Akbar's historian Abdul Qadri Badayuni was present in this war, he writes 
that the number of our army was 5000 while Maharana The number of Pratap's army was 3000. For the 
first time in this war, it was so fierce that our army ran 7 miles near Banas river in the narrow pass of 
Haldighati. Badayun further writes that when we reached Gogunda, there was so much fear in us. was so 
pervasive that we heard the wall all around After this, when both Mansingh and all of them reached 
Akbar's court, both of them were refused by Akbar to come to the court and said that after today you will 
not show me. Many copper plates are found in Haldighati from which information is obtain ed That 
Maharana Pratap donated the land here, all these facts prove that Akbar was defeated and Maharana 
Pratap won in this war. 
BATTLE OF DIWAIR 1582 
Rajasthan, the holy land of heroes and heroines, has seen hundreds of wars, but this war between 
Maharana Pratap and Akbar at a place named Divar in Mewar is known as "Marathon War" in history. 
This war proved to be a decisive battle between the Rajputs and the Mughals. Maharana Pratap got 
Vijayashree in this marathon. The war can be called India's first s urgical strike, in which Pratap killed 
the Mughal army, Pratap's decisive victory in this war, in which Pratap's son Amarsingh demonstrated 
amazing bravery. Akbar's commander in this war was Asaf Khan. 
PRATAP'S LAST TIME 
After the Divar war, Akbar could no t pay more attention to Pratap, because now he was busy in the 
campaigns of South India, which benefited Pratap and till his death, he freed all the territories of Mewar 
won by Akbar from the clutches of the Mughals, only Chittor. except | One day in 1597 AD, Maharan 
Pratap was stringing a bow, when suddenly the string broke and Pratap was injured after being hit in the 
chest and eventually he died. In memory of this, his 8-pillar umbrella is built in Chavand, which reminds 
of the worshiper of self-respect and independence. Everything in this world is going to end. Wealth will 
pass away but the qualities of a great man will live forever.”Pratap gave up wealth but never bowed 
down his head. He alone maintained his honor among all the princes of Hind. 
PRATAP'S TRUE FRIEND CHETAK 
 
Figure 3
International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) 
 
E-ISSN: 2582-2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com       ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com 
 
IJFMR23011524 Volume 5, Issue 1, January-February 2023 5 
 
Chetak was the name of Maharana Pratap's favorite and famous Nilavarna horse of Iranian origin. 
Chetak Horse The fodder traders of Gujarat brought three Kathiawad  breed horses Chetak, Tratak and 
Atak to Mewar. Stuck test w orked. Tratak Maharana Pratap gave it to his younger brother Shakti Singh 
and kept Chetak himself. In the battle of Haldighati, there was a fierce battle between Mughal Emperor 
Akbar and Maharana Pratap. During this war, his horse 'Chetak', which was consi dered a great ally of 
Maharana Pratap, was also recorded in the pages of history forever. It is believed that Chetak was a very 
intelligent and brave horse. In the Battle of Haldighati, Chetak jumped from a 25 feet deep river to save 
the life of his lord Maharana Pratap from the Mughal army. 
Maharana Pratap had to leave the battlefield after being badly injured in Haldighati and in the end 
Chetak died near this battlefield after getting injured. Even today the temple of Chetak is built there and 
the story of Chetak's bravery is described. 
There were many creations about Chetak in Hindi literature. Actually Chetak was very excited and agile 
and he himself used to find his master, Chetak chose Maharana Pratap as his master. It is said that there 
was a deep con nection between Maharana Pratap and Chetak. In fact, if seen, Maharana Pratap also 
loved Chetak very much. He was not only honest and agile but also fearless and powerful. 
AKBAR'S RESPONSE TO PRATAP'S DEATH. 
The character of Maharana Pratap was not like th at of any contemporary king. Because of all these, 
Maharana Pratap became the patron of Indian culture. Akbar was the biggest enemy of Maharana Pratap, 
but still he praised Maharana Pratap in his heart. Used to do Akbar was very sad on the death of 
Maharana Pratap because he used to praise his qualities. On the death of Pratap, the poet Dursa Ada, 
who was present in Akbar's court, recited a poem whose expressions were as follows that “who ever 
gave his horses to the royal army Who never showed his turban in  front of anyone, who was able to pull 
across the whole of India, under whose banner all the kings came but Maharana Pratap never came, so 
even in the eyes of Emperor Akbar, Maharana On the death of Pratap, water was filled, he has pressed 
his finger under his teeth, Pratap you have won and after that Akbar rewarded that poet. 
PRATAP'S CONTRIBUTION TO ART AND CULTURE  
Maharana Pratap's childhood was spent in the culture of the Bhil tribe of Mewar. In the Mewar region, 
the word Kika lovingly calls the child i n the Bhil tribe. The Bhil tribe of Mewar supported Maharana 
Pratap till the end for the protection of Marwad, establishing the capital of Mewar in Chavand and 
fighting with Maharana Pratap in the jungles of Mewar. | The credit for keeping Pratap safe with  the 
family is given to the Bhil tribe. By supporting Maharan Pratap for the protection of Meawad, the Bhil 
tribe gave the introduction of extreme sacrifice, duty, loyalty, self -devotion, bravery and unique 
sacrifice, even today it is written in golden letters on the pages of Indian history. 
IMPLICATIONS  
 
• Providing variety of experiences about history 
• Emphasis on development of  historical 
• Emphasis on facilities for education & research
International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) 
 
E-ISSN: 2582-2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com       ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com 
 
IJFMR23011524 Volume 5, Issue 1, January-February 2023 6 
 
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH  
• Do your background research  
• Understand the objectives  
• Choose the most suitable research methods  
• Expect the unexpected  
• Maintain a child-like enthusiasm  
• Be empathic but maintain objectivity  
• Analyze the results with a colleague 
REFERENCES 
Research paper 
1. Vanina, E ugenia. (2016). Maharana Pratap: A medieval hero in contemporary 
interpretations. Dialog so Vremenem. 41-55. 
2. Korhan, KAYA. (2013). Maharana Prat ap ve Haldighati Savaşı. Ankara Üniversitesi 
Dil ve Tarih-Coğrafya Fakültesi Dergisi. 53. 365-376. 10.1501/Dtcfder_0000001357. 
3. Saini, Archana & Dua, A. & Mohindra, Vindhya. (2009). A morphometric study of 
giant river catfish (sperata seenghala) population in Maharana Pratap Sagar lake of 
Pong Dam. Ecology, Environment and Conservation. 15. 857 -862. 
4. Gadhvi, Priyvrat. (2020). Chronicles of Valour-The Battle of Haldighati. 
5. Vanina, Eugenia. (2016). Maharana Pratap: A medieval hero in contemporary 
interpretations. Dialog so Vremenem. 41-55. 
WEBSITE 
1. https://hindi.webdunia.com/indian-history-and-culture/life-of-maharana-pratap-
121050900019_1.html 
2. https://hindi.webdunia.com/inspiring-personality/maharana-pratap-life-
121011800050_1.html 
3. https://www.drishtiias.com/hindi/prelims-facts/birth-anniversary-of-maharana-pratap 
4. https://shubhamsirohi.com/maharana-pratap-history-in-hindi/ 
5. https://www.bhaskar.com/news/RAJ-UDA-OMC-maharana-pratap-trained-by-his-
mother-5604509-PHO.html 
6. https://www.dhyeyaias.com/hindi/current-affairs/daily-current-affairs/maharana-
pratap 
7. https://www.deepawali.co.in/maharana-pratap-jeevan-parichay-essay-chetak-history-
in-hindi.html 
8. https://www.shutterstock.com/search/chetak+horse 
9. https://stock.adobe.com/search?k=maharana